Welcome to the Global News podcast on
YouTube where we go behind the
headlines. And today we're looking at
how Europe can respond to those tariff
threats from President Trump over
Greenland. We're joined from Brussels by
our Europe correspondent Nick Beak. And
Nick, first of all, outline for us this
tricky situation that European leaders
are having to navigate.
>> Well, on the one hand, Ollie, it's a
really simple situation. When you talk
about Greenland for European leaders, it
is a territory which is part of Denmark,
which in turn is part of the European
Union, and it is not for sale. The
problem is that President Trump sees it
in a very different way. He says that he
has to get Greenland. He says he needs
that for security, for the security of
the US, the security of the world. He
says there such a big threat from China
and Russia that really the answer to
combat that is American ownership. The
European Union says absolutely not. This
is something that can't be entertained.
And what we've seen now is that
President Trump is threatening to apply
tariffs, taxes on eight European
countries who have given their support
to Greenland. He's not happy with them
at all. And so Europe is trying to work
out how do they respond to that threat
from the man in the White House.
>> And what is this big bazooka or trade
bazooka that Europe might use?
>> Yeah. So this is something that the
Europeans came up with two years ago and
the idea is if there is a hostile
external force which is trying to bully
the European Union interfere in its
affairs there is a way of responding to
that taking economic action. Now at the
time they were thinking of China
potentially bullying the EU. They
weren't thinking about the US. But what
would happen if this device were to be
used this so-called trade bazooka? What
they do is there would be counter
measures. There'd be retaliatory
tariffs. So basically things would be
attacks would be put on American goods.
Maybe American firms would be banned
from sending their goods into the
European uh single market. Maybe US
firms would be barred from going for
some sort of contracts that were
available globally. So this is something
that could be done. President Macarron
of France has said that he believes it's
the way forward. Interestingly, the
Germans have suggested they might think
this is also the right approach. But
then you've got Georgia Maloney of
Italy, and she is saying, "Look, we
really don't want to be dragged into a
trade war with our biggest trading
partner, who of course is the United
States."
>> And what other options do the Europeans
have? There was some suggestion they
might revive tariffs they were
considering last year.
>> Yeah, interesting one. This this was
some 93 billion euros worth of tariffs.
And this sort of short list or long list
really of different American products
that may be subject to tariffs was put
together after Donald Trump made his
first round of tariff threats against
the European Union and of course lots of
other countries around the world. They
had this negotiating period and back in
July of last year they came to this
arrangement whereby there would be a 15%
tariff applied to to many European goods
going into America and a lot of people
saw that as lopsided because there
weren't to be any tariffs on the
American products being sent here to
Europe. So at the time they drew up this
list of potential American products that
may be taxed further in the future. they
haven't gone ahead with putting this
into practice. But now some people are
saying, well actually if the President
Trump if President Trump is talking
about doing this, maybe this is
something we should look at again as a
way of retaliating and certainly making
him think again.
>> There's some suggestion that this all
might be a negotiating tactic from
Europe. Will President Trump care about
either a trade bazooka or tariffs? He
seems desperate to get hold of Greenland
at all costs.
>> He does, doesn't he? He said that
America absolutely has to have Greenland
and the sort of that what we're hearing
from Washington DC is that he is deadly
serious uh in this pursuit of what is
the biggest island in the world in terms
of what will affect his thinking if
there is a trade war and clearly this
wouldn't be something that kicks in in
24 hours and we see instantaneous uh
results and impact on millions of people
but if there is some sort of big
disagreement economically
between the US and the EU and it affects
people in in the US in particular as
well as millions of consumers here in
Europe. Surely that will be something
that has an impact on President Trump
who likes to boast of having uh
basically reignited the US economy that
people are feeling much better off with
him being the man leading the country.
So that could be something that makes
him think twice. But I think the
challenge for European leaders that
they're trying to think about something
in the short term that would make him
think again and sort of row back from
what he's threatening to do.
>> You mentioned some differences between
the Italian Prime Minister George
Maloney and some of the others. Um could
Europe stay united if push comes to
shove here?
>> Well, I think that could be quite
difficult actually. And it was
interesting when President Trump first
announced that there could be tariffs on
the European countries who've shown
their support for Greenland and by
extension Denmark. So we're talking
about uh the United Kingdom, France,
Germany, some of the Nordic countries,
Denmarkers as well. The immediate
reaction from the woman who runs the the
EU's foreign policy, Kaakalas, she said
Russia and China will be basically
rubbing their hands with glee. They
can't believe their luck, the prospect
of Europe being disunited on this and
being weakened and fragmented. And I
think there is a challenge because as
we've seen with Ukraine over the past
couple of years, quite often people say,
you know, Europe thinks this or Europe
wants to do that. It's not quite as
simple as that. You've got 27 different
countries with competing ideas. All of
these leaders have to think about their
domestic audiences and you've got the
likes of Hungary have been, you know,
really problematic at times. also
Slovakia uh and and other countries not
willing to sign up to what maybe France
and Germany want. So I think the idea of
European unity is really being tested at
the moment by President Trump.
>> And how bad could things get for the
global economy? Could we see a world
trade war?
>> I think certainly that's the fear that
privately diplomats and politicians and
leaders are talking about. They don't
want to make things any worse. And I I
get a sense that there may well be a
wait andsee approach to this that the
threat of a a global trade war, one that
eminence emanates from Europe is
something that people don't want to to
contemplate already in a world which has
got so much uh so many problems with
different geopolitical hotspots with
conflicts raging. And so I think what
people will do is they'll wait and see
if President Trump says more. or does he
flesh out this argument that he's making
for more tariffs? Is it the case that
his attention is turned elsewhere? Can
there be some sort of arrangement
reached with him? I I think the European
leaders will not want to rush into any
sort of rash decisions here and really
try and take their time and try to
present whether that's possible or not
some sort of united front.
>> Yeah, I was going to ask you what are
the chances of a deal? You have the
likes of Sakir Stama, the British prime
minister, trying to dial things down.
>> Yeah, I think the problem, Ollie, is
that the two sides, the US and the EU
are just poles apart when it comes to
sort of fundamental questions here. The
Europeans saying that Greenland is not
for sale. So in a way there's no way we
can have a discussion or a debate or an
argument and sit down with all these
highle meetings and lots of people uh
gathered round tables taking notes
copiously because you know if you're not
going to sell it that's not the case.
President Trump says there has to be an
outcome to this. This is the businessman
in him who says there has to be a
solution to this. He hasn't taken away
the possibility of military
intervention. People think that that is
very unlikely, but he's kept that on the
table. And he says, look, he has to buy
it for the security of the United
States, the security of Europe, and the
security of the whole world. So I it's
hard to see how a deal can be done here
because what would be the terms of a
deal? What would it look like? But
certainly European leaders are talking
about compromise and trying to
accommodate President Trump in some way.
>> Nick, thank you very much. Nick Beak,
our Europe correspondent in Brussels. If
you like this episode, please subscribe
here on YouTube. And if there's anything
you'd like us to cover, leave a comment
below. And for more like this, tune in
to the Global News podcast, wherever you
get your BBC podcasts.